[docs] Add an Xdebug tracing and profiling guide (#4281)
WordPress/wordpress-playground: packages/docs/site/docs/developers/07-xdebug/03-trace-and-profile.md

---
title: Tracing and Profiling with Xdebug
slug: /developers/xdebug/trace-and-profile
description: Record Xdebug function traces and cachegrind profiles from WordPress Playground and read them in Speedscope, KCachegrind, or your IDE.
---

# Tracing and Profiling with Xdebug

Besides the step debugger, Xdebug can record what your code did after the fact:

- **`trace` mode** writes every function call, argument, and timing to a `trace.*.xt` file.
- **`profile` mode** writes a cachegrind file you can open in [Speedscope](https://www.speedscope.app/), KCachegrind, QCachegrind, or PhpStorm.

> Playground enables `debug,develop` by default. Turn the other modes on with the
> `--php-ini` flag, which sets any [php.ini setting](https://www.php.net/manual/en/ini.list.php),
> including every [Xdebug setting](https://xdebug.org/docs/all_settings). Entries
> set this way override both the Playground defaults and the Xdebug defaults.

Reviewer: Clarify that these defaults apply when Xdebug is enabled:

```suggestion
When started with `--xdebug`, Playground enables the `debug` and `develop`
modes by default. Use `--php-ini` to enable additional modes or change any
[php.ini setting](https://www.php.net/manual/en/ini.list.php), including
[Xdebug settings](https://xdebug.org/docs/all_settings). Values passed this way
override both Playground's and Xdebug's defaults.
```

## Recording a trace and a profile

Trace and profile files are written to `xdebug.output_dir`, which is a path in
Playground's virtual filesystem. Mount a directory of your own there so the
files survive after the request ends:

```bash
mkdir -p ./xdebug-output

npx @wp-playground/cli@latest server \
	--xdebug \
	--mount ./xdebug-output:/xdebug-output \
	--php-ini xdebug.mode debug,develop,trace,profile \
	--php-ini xdebug.start_with_request trigger \
	--php-ini xdebug.output_dir /xdebug-output \

> 	--php-ini xdebug.trace_output_name trace.%t.%p \
> 	--php-ini xdebug.profiler_output_name cachegrind.out.%t.%p

Reviewer: Use `%u` instead of `%t`. `%u` includes microseconds, while `%t` includes only seconds and can still produce duplicate names. [[Xdebug reference](https://xdebug.org/docs/all_settings#trace_output_name)](https://xdebug.org/docs/all_settings#trace_output_name)

```suggestion
	--php-ini xdebug.trace_output_name trace.%u.%p \
	--php-ini xdebug.profiler_output_name cachegrind.out.%u.%p
```

the time went, and open the trace file in your editor to follow the call path.

### Record on demand, not on every request

`xdebug.start_with_request=trigger` is the setting that makes recording opt-in.
Nothing is written until a request carries `XDEBUG_TRIGGER` as a `GET`
parameter, a `POST` parameter, or a cookie.

This matters because the files are large. One WordPress front-page request
produces a trace of about 135 MB and a cachegrind file of about 22 MB. With
`xdebug.start_with_request=yes`, every request, including every admin-ajax
and REST call your browser makes, writes both files.

The trigger also starts the step debugger, so a Playground started this way
only connects to your IDE on triggered requests.

### Give every recording its own file name

Xdebug names the files after the process ID by default, so a second request
from the same worker overwrites the first one. Playground CLI runs several
workers, which makes the collision easy to hit.

Adding `%t` (timestamp) to `xdebug.trace_output_name` and
`xdebug.profiler_output_name` keeps one file per request, as in the command
above. Running with `--workers=1` also keeps the output predictable.

## Using the library API

> PHP reads `php.ini` first and each extension's own ini file after, so the
> value `xdebug.ini` ships wins over the same entry in `php.ini`. Playground
> CLI therefore writes each `--php-ini` entry to the file PHP reads it from:
> entries named after an extension go to that extension's ini file, every other
> entry goes to `php.ini`. Applications built on `@php-wasm/node`, such as
> Studio, write Xdebug entries to `xdebug.ini` with `setPhpIniEntries()`:

Reviewer: Simplify the explanation and make the precedence clearer:

```suggestion
PHP reads `php.ini` before extension-specific ini files, so settings in
`xdebug.ini` take precedence over matching settings in `php.ini`. The
Playground CLI writes `xdebug.*` entries to `xdebug.ini` and all other entries
to `php.ini`. When using `@php-wasm/node` directly, pass the Xdebug ini path to
`setPhpIniEntries()`:
```

```ts
import { PHP, PHP_EXTENSIONS_DIR, setPhpIniEntries } from '@php-wasm/universal';
import { joinPaths } from '@php-wasm/util';
import { loadNodeRuntime, createNodeFsMountHandler } from '@php-wasm/node';

const php = new PHP(await loadNodeRuntime('8.5', { extensions: ['xdebug'] }));

await setPhpIniEntries(
	php,
	{
		'xdebug.mode': 'debug,develop,trace,profile',
		'xdebug.start_with_request': 'trigger',
		'xdebug.output_dir': '/xdebug-output',

> 		'xdebug.trace_output_name': 'trace.%t.%p',
> 		'xdebug.profiler_output_name': 'cachegrind.out.%t.%p',

Reviewer: Keep the library example consistent with the CLI example:

```suggestion
		'xdebug.trace_output_name': 'trace.%u.%p',
		'xdebug.profiler_output_name': 'cachegrind.out.%u.%p',
```
